---
Rust Memory Management
2019 Feb
blog
---
# Rust's Memory Management System
###### Feb 2019
##### [draft, work in progress] 



## Background

Operating systems provide an abstraction of physical memory to each running
program called **A Virtual Address Space,** for now, assume an address space contains 3 sections:   

* An Instruction section  
Where the program Instructions live.
* A **Stack**   
To track function calls, store local variables, function arguments, and return
values.
* A **Heap**   
For User-managed, dynamically (or runtime) alloacated memory.


The stack is structured to follow a strict *first in, last out* policy; thus,
inserting, deleting, or accessing data on the stack doesnt require intensive
computation. However, data stored on the stack must have a known size at compile
time that must remain fixed and they cant be used beyond their scope. To address these limitations, we store data of
unknown and/or dynamic size on the heap.   


Since Heaps lack the determinism of stacks, They cost more to manage and there has been two common approches for managing heap allocated memory:  
* **Garbage Collection**  
Garbage collected languages manage memory automatically which
comes at a runtime performance cost.
* **Manual Management**  
Memory is managed exlicity by the programmer. Managing memory manually is an
error-prone process that demands careful attention, common bugs include:

    * **Segmentation Faults**  
    Performing an operation on Memory that is was not alloacted.
    * **Buffer Overflow**  
    Alloacted Memory is not enough.   
    * **Memory Leaks**  
    Memory allocated is not freed; and thus, wasted.   
    * **Invalid Access**  
    Attempting to access already dealocated memory, or failing to alloact
    properly.   
    * **free on unallocated memory**  
    Attempting to dealocate already dealocated memory.  


Rust introduces a 3rd novel approch that is not as compuationally expensive as
Garbage Collection, and not as error-prone as Dynamic allocation/deallocation: **Ownership.**   

### Rules

* A *Variable* carrying A Value is the **Owner** of that Value.
* There can only be _**one**_ owner at a time.
* When an owner goes out of scope, the value is **dropped**

> **Dropped** is rust's term for *Deallocated*
